Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., speaks to the media on March 25.A new decision from the U.S. Senate's nonpartisan parliamentarian means Democrats could advance more of President Biden's agenda without the support of Republicans.The official's interpretation of Senate budget rules would allow the use of the reconciliation process more than once in a fiscal year, and it is viewed by Democrats as a possible strategy for moving top policy priorities with a simple majority, since getting the needed 10 Republican votes in a 50-50 Senate has proved difficult.Details are still unclear as to how Democratic leaders might use the additional chance to pass budget-related policies."The Parliamentarian has advised that a revised budget resolution may contain budget reconciliation instructions," Justin Goodman, a spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., said in a statement Monday. "While no decisions have been made on a legislative path forward using Section 304 and some parameters still need to be worked out, the Parliamentarian's opinion is an important step forward that this key pathway is available to Democrats if needed."Democrats have been vague about those additional parameters and the potential limitations that might come with this legislative pathway. The ruling appears to mean a majority party could revise budgets more than once in a fiscal year — each time giving them access to reconciliation instructions.The decision comes as Democrats take up Biden's more than $2 trillion infrastructure proposal, which he unveiled last week.Some moderate Democrats, including Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, have balked at its plan to increase the corporate tax rate from 21% to 28%. (Manchin favors a smaller hike.) Party leaders have not released any legislative text or final details of the policies Biden outlined in his proposal, nor have they said how they would work to ensure that there would be unanimous support among Senate Democrats, something that would be necessary to pass the bill without any Republican support.The parliamentarian's ruling could allow Democrats to break big packages, like Biden's infrastructure plan, into smaller pieces. That could potentially make it easier to pass elements of the sweeping agenda, by enticing Republicans to support some of its policies.But using reconciliation also limits what elements can be in a bill. Earlier this year, the parliamentarian ruled that a federal minimum wage increase did not fit in the rules.
Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson, pictured in 2019, on Monday said the bill banning gender-affirming medical care for transgender youth would set "new standards of legislative interference with physicians and parents as they deal with some of the most complex and sensitive matters involving young people."Arkansas' governor on Monday vetoed a bill that would have made the state the first to ban gender-affirming medical care, including surgery, for transgender minors, even with parental consent.Gov. Asa Hutchinson, a Republican, called the Save Adolescents From Experimentation Act, or SAFE Act, "a vast government overreach."He told reporters that it would set "new standards of legislative interference with physicians and parents as they deal with some of the most complex and sensitive matters involving young people."The bill, approved in the House and Senate last month, would bar transgender youth from obtaining gender-affirming care, including puberty blockers and hormone therapy. It also would prohibit medical providers from making referrals to other health care professionals for gender-affirming procedures for those under 18.Health care providers who offered such care could lose their license to practice in the state or be vulnerable to civil litigation.The move by Hutchinson bucks a growing legislative movement at the state level targeting transgender people. Legislative bodies in Tennessee, Texas and South Carolina have all passed anti-transgender medical care bans since the start of 2021, the Human Rights Campaign reported. And several others, including Arkansas, have passed laws banning transgender athletes from competing on sports teams matching their gender identity.But Hutchinson's veto may not be the end of the SAFE Act. The Republican-led legislature could still enact the measure since it would take only a simple majority to override the veto.
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen listens during a meeting with President Biden in the White House on March 5. Yellen on Monday proposed a minimum global tax rate for corporations.It's an idea that has been debated widely across global capitals: impose the same minimum corporate tax rate all over the world to prevent companies from shopping around for the country that can offer the smallest tax bill.Now, it has a powerful new adherent. Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen on Monday expressed support for a minimum tax rate, providing the vital backing of the U.S. government.Yellen, in a speech, said a minimum global tax rate would stop what she described as a "30-year race to the bottom" that has allowed big corporations to avoid contributing fully to vital national needs.The support for a global tax rate is a new plank in the Biden administration's tougher approach to corporate taxes.President Biden is already counting on higher corporate tax revenues to fund his administration's $2.3 trillion infrastructure plan.Yellen's endorsement of a global minimum tax rate is now meant to ensure that companies pay a minimum amount of tax no matter where they are based — reducing the temptation to relocate to another country. It would also ensure that higher tax rates at home don't put U.S. companies at such a large global disadvantage."It's important to work with other countries to end the pressures of tax competition," Yellen told the Chicago Council on Global Affairs. "We're working with G-20 nations to agree to a global minimum corporate tax rate that can stop the race to the bottom."It's not clear that low-tax countries would embrace a higher global minimum. Ireland, for example, has derived a major competitive advantage with a lower tax regimen, attracting the likes of Apple to the country.That has often pitted Ireland against higher-tax governments. But the global minimum tax rate has generally been strongly opposed by corporations, making it unclear whether countries will end up agreeing on the proposal.In the United States, business groups like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have already said they oppose the Biden administration's plan to raise corporate taxes to fund infrastructure, even if they applaud increased investment in areas like roads, ports and broadband.Biden's plan would raise the tax rate on corporations from 21% to 28%, while also taxing companies' foreign income at a rate of at least 21%. The administration says the plan would raise enough revenue over 15 years to cover eight years of spending on infrastructure.The corporate tax rate was 35% before the 2017 tax cut by the Trump administration. But companies are often able to lower their tax bill through various deductions or by parking profits in low-tax havens overseas.The left-leaning Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy notes that 55 big corporations — including Nike, FedEx and Duke Energy — paid no federal income taxes in the most recent fiscal year, despite reporting a collective profit of more than $40 billion to their shareholders.As a share of the overall economy, U.S. corporations pay lower taxes than many of their foreign competitors. Corporate tax revenues at the federal, state and local levels in the U.S. are 1% of GDP, compared with about 2% in Germany, France and Italy and around 4% in Japan and Canada.Yellen said it's important that "all citizens fairly share the burden of financing government.""Competitiveness is about more than how U.S.-headquartered companies fare against other companies in global merger-and-acquisition bids," Yellen also argued. "It's about making sure that governments have stable tax systems that raise sufficient revenue to invest in essential public goods and respond to crises."
Then Sen.-elect Joe Biden and his first wife, Neilia, cut his 30th-birthday cake at a party in Wilmington, Del., in 1972 as their sons, Beau (left) and Hunter, look on. Neilia and their daughter, Naomi, died in a car crash that year. Beau and Hunter were seriously injured but survived.At its heart, Hunter Biden's new memoir, Beautiful Things, is a story of addiction.Biden, the 51-year-old son of the president, writes that he first bought crack cocaine at age 18. He first fell in love with alcohol in high school and started drinking heavily after work in his 20s. "I always could drink five times more than anyone else," he writes.He has been in and out of rehab numerous times over the last two decades and has had long periods of sobriety between relapses.It's also a story about a family's love and loss. Biden was 2 years old when his mother and sister died in a car crash. Hunter and his brother, Beau, were seriously injured but survived.Biden writes that his addictions entered a particularly dark phase after Beau died of brain cancer in 2015. It got to the point where in an intervention in early 2019, his father held him in a bear hug, saying, "I don't know what to do."Hunter Biden says his wife, Melissa, got his life under control shortly after they met later that year.Hunter Biden, at the time serving as board chairman of World Food Program USA, with then-Vice President Joe Biden in 2016. Hunter Biden says his addictions worsened after his brother Beau's death in 2015.In an interview with NPR's Scott Simon airing on Morning Edition, Biden credits his family's unflinching love for his survival.There was "never a moment that they weren't trying to save me," Biden says.He also addresses his well-paid work for the Ukrainian gas company Burisma, which began in 2014 while this father, Joe Biden, was vice president. Former President Donald Trump portrayed it as a corrupt deal that involved Joe Biden. Trump's effort to pressure Ukraine to investigate the Bidens led to Trump's first impeachment.An investigation led by Senate Republicans found that Hunter Biden's position on the company's board raised concerns about a possible conflict of interest but concluded "the extent to which" his role "affected U.S. policy toward Ukraine is not clear." Biden says he did nothing unethical.He tells NPR that it "was certainly not wise in this political environment to create that perception" of corruption "and that's why I would not do it again."Can you tell us some of those things that you tell yourself when you were drinking?One of the things about being stuck in your addiction — there wasn't much that I think any alcoholic, when they're drinking, is rationally thinking. And that's the reason why it's such a hard thing to pull yourself out of.I talk about this in the book when my dad and my mom asked me to come down. And I was staying in a motel room somewhere in Connecticut, and I walk into the house and there they are with my daughters, Naomi, Finnegan and Maisy, and my niece and nephew, Natalie and Hunter, and two counselors. You know, my immediate reaction was to run. My dad grabbed me and he held onto me and put me in a bear hug and just said, "I don't know what to do." And even with all of that love, the feeling that overcame that love was my need for another hit, which is a hard thing to live with.But that's what recovery is about — is getting honest with yourself and understanding the power of that drug or power of the addiction.Your father said to you when that happened, in your recollection in the book, he says, "I don't know what else to do. I'm so scared. Tell me what to do."Yeah, I think there's so many people that love someone that's struggling with addiction. I mean, we are struggling with two pandemics right now, the coronavirus but also a pandemic of addiction, which ultimately I hope we start to talk about as a mental health issue rather than just a criminal justice issue.You were on the board of a Ukrainian energy company while your father was involved in making U.S. policy toward Ukraine. Now, an investigation by Senate Republicans didn't find any wrongdoing or improper influence, but was it a wise thing to do?I was on about a dozen boards before I joined the board of Burisma. I had an expertise in corporate governance. I was a lawyer for Boies Schiller Flexner, which is one of the best law firms in the world. That's how I came to the job.Oh, I think that in every instance it is important for me to make that clear and to be honest about that. But, you know, I worked hard to graduate Yale Law School. I had a business. And at the end of the day, the question was whether it was wise. Well, what I know now is that it was certainly not wise in this political environment to create that perception, and that's why I would not do it again.I think it's reported. I was paid handsomely. I don't want to say the exact number right now because I don't want to get it wrong, but I was paid very well.Because there are sections in the book when you describe that you would be ensconced for weeks in hotel suites, cooking and doing crack, while your dealers would clear out the minibar, order room service all on your tab. How did you afford that?Well, I had a successful business beyond Burisma. And the fact of the matter is that addiction hits hard and fast. And if I hadn't of pulled out of my tailspin, I wouldn't have been able to continue. But it wasn't just hotel suites. I spent a lot more time in $39-a-night motel rooms up and down I-95.Constantly. I have a healthy fear of relapse. It's too much a part of my story. I'm only one choice away from being back exactly where I was. And that's the conundrum for everyone that's in recovery. It never goes away. It only hides.I've never been afraid of hurting my dad in the sense that any mistakes that I've made would rupture his love for me. But I still am constantly aware of how much pain I caused. ...This is the reason I wrote the book, truly the reason I wrote the book, is that it'll give hopefully some people hope. Give them some hope that they don't have to remain locked in that prison. And I don't just mean the people that are stuck at the bottom of the well like I was, but the people that stand at the top of that well and realize unless we go down with the lantern, he's never going to find his way out. But that's a dark and dangerous journey for them. And it was for my family. But their light was never not seeking me out. Never a moment, never a moment that they weren't trying to save me.Samantha Balaban and Ed McNulty produced and edited the audio interview.
President Biden speaks at a FEMA COVID-19 mass vaccination site in Houston in February.The Federal Emergency Management Agency, or FEMA, is the agency we think of responding to natural disasters like hurricanes and earthquakes. But in recent weeks it's also been helping to administer COVID-19 vaccinations in several states, as well as assisting at the border.White House press secretary Jen Psaki said last month FEMA was helping the Department of Health and Human Services place unaccompanied minors in shelters and with families. "They're playing a number of roles there to address what we feel is a significant problem and a significant challenge."Playing a "number of roles" is nothing new for FEMA, but Elizabeth Zimmerman, a former associate administrator at the agency during the Obama administration, says it does pose a potential problem."FEMA is stretched very thin right now," she told NPR. "FEMA is the coordinating agency on behalf of the president and does their job and does it very well. But when you do look at FEMA's daily reports with the number of staff that they have available to deploy for disasters, it is very low."With some 5,000 full-time employees, FEMA is one of the smallest federal agencies. It has another 23,000 temporary workers on reserve. Almost all are deployed right now, working on previous disasters and at the border and with COVID-19, leaving about 2,700 workers available in case another disaster strikes.Steve Reaves, president of AFGE National Local 4060, the union that represents FEMA employees, says the agency is short-staffed with future disaster deployments likely on top of existing responsibilities. "With fire season and hurricane season, and right after that flood season, the mudslides season, right? We need we need more people."Brock Long, who served as FEMA administrator during the Trump administration, said in a statement to NPR that "if the FEMA workforce was a car engine, it has been red-lining since 2017."He said the current path is unsustainable, and that the agency "was never designed to be the federal government's equivalent to 911."But Zimmerman says that's just what the agency has become: "FEMA is looked at across the whole federal government as being that agency who knows how to coordinate and bring people together to get action, to get results."A FEMA representative assists people waiting to receive a dose of the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine at a vaccination site in Los Angeles on March 11.Craig Fugate, who was FEMA administrator during the Obama administration, says concerns about the agency being stretched too thin are exaggerated."This is an evergreen story, it comes up every time FEMA gets busy. What most people don't understand is that there's a lot of flexibility in how FEMA deploys," he says.Fugate says the vaccination centers are not staffed entirely by FEMA. "There's a lot of contractors and a lot of other federal agencies that are doing the bulk of it," he says. "So, you know, when you think about these sites, they're not like hundreds of FEMA employees at every one of them."Fugate says if another disaster strikes, FEMA can transfer workers from other long-term disaster rebuilding, which he says is disruptive, "but it doesn't have the same urgency as the next disaster."He says when he was administrator, "We had people down in Haiti during the the earthquake there. We had deployed people to CDC during Ebola. We were involved in the border." In fact, Fugate says, "this is actually a much smaller deployment than we did in the Obama administration."Fugate says the biggest issue for FEMA's additional deployments is paying for them. During his tenure, FEMA was reimbursed for its assistance at the border by HHS, and that the CDC paid for FEMA's help with Ebola.Meanwhile, President Biden this week declared a major disaster in Kentucky because of severe storms there in February, making it eligible for federal assistance and serving as another reminder of the day-to-day role FEMA plays.The AFGE's Reaves calls FEMA "the closest thing in the federal government to the Red Cross," adding, "You can really make a difference and you're really making a difference in people's lives on the worst day of their life. And that's really our mission."
Dr. Rachel Levine during her confirmation hearing in February. In an NPR interview Thursday, Levine questions state measures limiting transgender rights.Dozens of states are considering Republican-led bills that advocates say are harmful to transgender people. The recent spate of bills are "really challenging to see," says Dr. Rachel Levine, the nation's newly confirmed assistant secretary for health."I really think that the decisions about health care for LGBTQ youth are really between the family, the child, the young person, their doctor, maybe their therapist," said Levine, the first openly transgender official to serve in any Senate-confirmed position, in an NPR interview.Though more Americans than ever oppose discrimination against transgender people, Levine is taking office at a time when trans rights have once again become a controversial political issue.Governors in Tennessee, Arkansas and South Dakota have recently signed legislation or executive orders aimed at banning transgender women and girls from participating in women's sports.A measure passed Monday in Arkansas is now awaiting the governor's signature and would ban transgender minors from accessing gender-affirming medical care like hormone blockers and would allow insurance companies to refuse such care for people of all ages. The ACLU of Arkansas called the bill "cruel and discriminatory."In her first interview since being confirmed, Levine questioned those efforts.Asked whether her comments risked drawing accusations of politicizing the department's work, Levine said no, casting her involvement as appropriate given her new stead as a top public health official."I don't see it as a political issue at all. I view this as a health equity issue," she said. "This is about fairness and equality and about specifically health equity, which is part of my portfolio. So I don't see any risk in terms of politicization of this issue."As the first openly transgender person to serve in such a high-ranking role — and for that role to be one of the nation's foremost public health posts — Levine said part of her responsibility is to educate Americans through her public appearances."I like to quote that sage Yoda from Star Wars. You know, 'Fear is the path that leads to the dark side. Fear leads to anger. Anger leads to hate. Hate leads to suffering.' I think that people fear what they don't understand," she said.Before her nomination, Levine most recently served as Pennsylvania's top public health officer and the president of an association of state health officials. But her appointment was widely opposed by religious groups and conservatives. Some right-leaning news coverage of her appointment misgendered her in their stories.During her confirmation hearing in February, Republican Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky criticized Levine's support of hormone blockers for minors and compared gender-affirming surgery to genital mutilation and amputation. Ultimately, only two Republican senators voted to confirm her.In a statement after her confirmation, Levine spoke directly to young transgender people, saying, "Sadly, some of the challenges you face are from people who would seek to use your identity and circumstances as a weapon. It hurts. I know."Levine joins the Biden administration's Department of Health and Human Services at a moment the agency confronts a slew of challenges: an unabating opioid crisis, considerably more unaccompanied minors crossing the border than previous years, and a rising number of uninsured Americans.The administration's first swing at a COVID-19-related relief package, the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan signed into law last month, included a provision that expands eligibility for health care subsidies for plans purchased through Healthcare.gov, the insurance marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act. The Biden administration now plans to spend $100 million to advertise the subsidies.Levine called the provision "one of the most significant pieces of health care legislation since the ACA," saying that the administration hopes the subsidies will draw 15 million uninsured Americans to sign up for plans. More than 25 million people in the United States currently do not have health insurance.And there is still the pandemic, with cases on the rise across the U.S. as some states lift restrictions.The Biden administration's effort to scale up the nation's vaccination program has been a success: Nearly 30% of the nation has received at least one dose of the vaccine, and confidence in the vaccines among the American public has risen significantly in the last few months. But cases have begun to tick up, and hospitalizations appear to be following."There is a light at the end of this tunnel with the distribution and the administration of the vaccines. But we're not done yet. We have to stay the course," Levine said. "Please wear a mask, wash your hands, stay socially distant. And when the vaccine is available to you, please get vaccinated."Sam Gringlas and Justine Kenin produced and edited the audio version of this story.
Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas speaks at the White House on March 1. He has pledged to reduce the processing of many asylum cases from "years to months."President Biden's top advisers promise "long-needed systemic reforms" to address a backlog of more than 1 million asylum cases in the immigration court system, which often keeps people applying for asylum waiting years to resolve their cases. That could mean some big changes to how asylum cases are processed at the southern border.The plan the Biden administration is considering to speed up the process would take some asylum cases from the southern border out of the hands of the overloaded immigration courts under the Department of Justice. Instead, it would handle them under the purview of the Department of Homeland Security, where asylum officers already process tens of thousands of cases a year, two people familiar with the discussions who were not authorized to speak about administration plans told NPR exclusively.Those familiar with the discussions say one outcome of this plan could be to discourage unauthorized migration. That's because currently those who can argue for a certain fear of persecution are able to gain temporary residence and often a work permit as they wait out their cases."The big flaw in the system right now is your family comes in, they're going to process you, you may end up with an ankle bracelet and an asylum hearing in three years," said a source familiar with the discussions. "And so it's really hard to explain to the country that it's not just an open door."Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas seemed to tease the plan earlier this month, promising to reengineer the asylum system."We will shorten from years to months the time it takes to adjudicate an asylum claim while ensuring procedural safeguards and enhancing access to counsel," Mayorkas said in a statement.There are currently about 530 judges in the immigration courts that handle a caseload that is now backed up to more than 1.2 million cases, according to the Justice Department. Meanwhile, the asylum office that could take on some of those cases under this plan has about 860 officers and a pending caseload of about 350,000, according to the Department of Homeland Security."So it's a much more flexible system," said Doris Meissner, a former commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service during the Clinton administration.The plan the Biden administration is considering is based largely on the one authored by Meissner, who is now a senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. Biden endorsed the plan when he was running for president.Doris Meissner, seen in 2008, led the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service in the Clinton administration. She crafted a plan to more quickly process a large backlog of asylum cases that the Biden administration is considering as it deals with increased crossings at the southern border.Meissner says the majority of Central Americans who arrive at the border are not going to be eligible for asylum, but some percentage will be eligible."And so that means that they would be able to get the protection they need in a prompt fashion, get on with their lives," Meissner said. "And then, of course, it's the responsibility of the government to return those people who are not eligible unless that migrant wants to appeal."She says the administration could dramatically reduce the caseload by making a regulatory change to allow cases along the border to be handled by asylum officers in the Department of Homeland Security instead of the immigration courts.Meissner and her colleagues say problems with the system were exacerbated by the Trump administration, which expanded controversial programs that fast-tracked the return of asylum-seekers at the southern border.The number of cases in the immigration courts has exploded over the past decade from more than 262,000 in 2010 to 1.26 million in 2020. Meanwhile, just over 231,000 cases were completed in 2020.Currently, asylum officers for border cases are in charge of making credible fear decisions, but then refer the cases to immigration courts.However, Meissner points out that asylum officers are already doing fuller reviews, including granting asylum for tens of thousands of people who already are in the United States."Asylum officers do exactly this work for cases that arise in other parts of the country, except at the southern border, because of this way that the statutes were written that didn't anticipate cases across the southern border," she said.In 2019, asylum officers granted asylum to nearly 30,000 applicants from places such as Venezuela, China, Egypt, Turkey and Russia.This included grants of asylum to more than 3,200 applicants from Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras who were already in the U.S. when they applied.Advocates say they welcome a more efficient system, provided changes are not used as a way to expedite removals as the Trump administration did.Eleanor Acer of Human Rights First says there are a host of reasons to allow asylum officers to conduct the first set of interviews and reduce the numbers, but she says it's important that applicants have a chance to appeal to the court before being removed."The massive backlog must be dealt with," she said. "But the answer to that problem is not to deprive asylum-seekers of due process and a fair hearing, or to weaponize the asylum process to try to deter other people from seeking U.S. protection."The Biden administration has already ended two of the Trump administration's programs, the Prompt Asylum Case Review and the Humanitarian Asylum Review Program, that were designed to quickly return Mexican and Central American asylum-seekers suspected of having invalid claims.Department of Homeland Security officials declined to discuss plans to shift border cases to the asylum division.But an administration official said last week they are now working on a number of policies and regulations to create "a better functioning asylum system."That includes establishing refugee processing in the region and strengthening other countries' asylum systems.Biden also resurrected the Central American Minors program that reunited children with parents who are in the United States legally.The Biden administration is now seeking to "pick up the pieces" after the Trump administration, with a different set of policies that abide by U.S. law but also international obligations, Meissner said."We need to have access to asylum," Meissner said, "but it needs to be done in a way that can be prompt and fair, not in a way that leads to waits of years and years and court backlogs."
U.S. Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg speaks to Amtrak employees Feb. 5 during a visit at Union Station in Washington, D.C. In a Thursday interview with NPR's Morning Edition, he said not making infrastructure investment would be a "threat to American competitiveness."President Biden calls his $2 trillion infrastructure plan a "once-in-a-generation" investment in America's future."It will create millions of jobs, good-paying jobs. It will grow the economy, make us more competitive around the world, promote our national security interests and put us in a position to win the global competition with China in the upcoming years," Biden said in Pittsburgh on Wednesday.As part of the plan, Biden is proposing $174 billion in spending to boost the electric vehicle market; $115 billion to repair and rebuild bridges, highways and roads; and $100 billion to expand high-speed broadband.In an interview with NPR's Morning Edition on Thursday, Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg called the plan a "common sense investment" that is "fully paid for" and will reduce the budget deficit over time. Not making that investment would be a "threat to American competitiveness," he said.The plan's emphasis on boosting electric vehicles is critical, Buttigieg said, because "time is running out" in the fight against climate change.The Biden administration proposes paying for this by raising the corporate tax rate from 21% to 28%. That money would be spent over the next eight years, but it would take 15 years for the tax hikes to generate the revenue you need. How is that not a problem?Well, this is common sense investment when you think about how to fund things that are going to improve America for a generation. Over the course of that eight-year vision, we are going to be enhancing the roads and bridges of this country. We're going to be improving our ports and our airports. We're going to be delivering better transit and better rail. Those are investments whose benefits will last a lifetime and then some, and that eight years of investment is fully paid for across the 15 years of the tax adjustment, which means by year 16, it's actually going to reduce the deficit.The Business Roundtable and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce say that raising corporate taxes will make it harder for U.S. companies to compete and thus make the U.S. less competitive in a global economy. That's a familiar argument from their camp. What's your response?Well, I think that argument flies in the face of U.S. history. Remember, we're proposing a corporate tax rate that is lower than it was under Clinton, Obama, Bush, much lower than it was in the early Reagan years and many other times when America was very competitive. But part of what made America so competitive was that we had some of the best infrastructure in the world. Today, we are still coasting off infrastructure investments that were made more than a lifetime ago and are beginning to fall apart. The biggest threat to American competitiveness is continuing to believe that we can have a world-leading economy with third-rate infrastructure. And I think that's something most Americans get.This proposal addresses things like roads, bridges, the electrical grid, broadband Internet. It would also expand home medical care. There's money for community-based violence prevention programs. There's money to create jobs to prevent future pandemics. How do you respond to the criticism that these things are just not infrastructure?These things are good policy, and they are part of the broad infrastructure that is needed in order to make America not just competitive, but a good place to live. We know that we've got to do more for our care workers, our care economy. That's another common sense move. And one of the things I really admire about this plan and the president's vision is understanding how a lot of different things are closely connected. You know, some people are saying, "well, you know, these aren't roads and bridges" and I'm the transportation guy, so I'm all about roads and bridges. But something like broadband infrastructure is absolutely part of the future of American infrastructure. I guess trains probably weren't considered infrastructure until we really started building railroads. Now they're an indispensable part of it. And we have to keep up with, not always be playing catch-up to, that kind of expansion about what infrastructure needs really look like.I think the criticism is directed at things like community-based programs to prevent violence. The argument is, are you not just taking everything that you want to invest in and calling it infrastructure?This is about the foundation on which Americans live. And obviously I'm focused on the huge shot in the arm that this represents for transportation infrastructure. But we've got to think about our broader social infrastructure that keeps this country moving, keeps this country safe, makes it possible to live well for American citizens. And suggesting that there's something wrong with a bill that does good things because it does more good things, you know, it's a bit like suggesting that the rescue plan that helped us defeat COVID was somehow bad because it's going to lift half a million children out of poverty. Look, we are weaker when we don't take care of these foundational issues. COVID exposed that. We've got to make sure this is a more resilient country in every respect.The proposal would give tax credits and rebates to consumers and governments for shifting to electric vehicles. It also would spend billions of dollars to get state and local governments to build charging stations for electric vehicles. The auto industry broadly is already moving toward electric vehicles. Why give so many incentives? Why not just let industry move forward in the direction that it's already going?Well, it's really exciting to see industry moving this way, but we also know that we're in a race against time. Time is running out in the fight against climate change. And frankly, we've got to pick up the pace. Another thing to consider, especially with these chargers, is that we need to have a nationwide network of charging infrastructure for people to be able to buy electric vehicles with confidence, at least some drivers who are going long distances. It is great that the cost of electric vehicles is going down each year and could even be a savings when you count the fuel expenses you're going to not pay. But there's still a lot of people who experience what's called range anxiety as maybe the No. 1 reason not to go electric. We've got to fix that. And these charging stations will help.This package has been characterized as a clear rebuke to the idea that the forces of a free market can jumpstart a badly hurting economy. Now, this country has spent the past 40 years doubling down on free markets. Do you see this as a kind of generational shift in thinking?Certainly from the perspective of my generation, and I was born right about the time of the beginning of that experiment, we can say that that experiment failed. It turns out that if you systematically disinvest in the things that we need to thrive, especially when it comes to core infrastructure, there are consequences to that. America is 13th now — 13th. We ought to be first when it comes to transportation infrastructure and a lot of our other indicators of quality of life, even length of life, just how long Americans live, are not befitting the leading nation in the world. Now's our chance to change that and do it in a sensible way. And the remarkable thing is, you know, maybe compared to other moments in American history, it feels like the American people are already there. We're just trying to get Washington to follow suit.Catherine Whelan, Fernando Pizarro, Ziad Buchh and Avery Keatley produced and edited the audio version of this story. Avie Schneider produced for the Web.
Former U.S. Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood admitted to federal prosecutors that he accepted a loan from a foreign billionaire and failed to disclose the check on government forms.Former U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood took $50,000 from an associate of a billionaire who ran an illegal scheme providing foreign contributions to U.S. campaigns, federal prosecutors said Wednesday. LaHood later failed to disclose the check on two government ethics forms as required.LaHood, the transportation secretary during former President Barack Obama's first term, took a $50,000 check from Virginia businessman Toufic Baaklini in 2012. According to the Department of Justice, LaHood "understood" this money was actually coming from Lebanese-Nigerian billionaire Gilbert Chagoury.LaHood didn't disclose the loan because he didn't want to be publicly associated with Chagoury. The DOJ said in a statement that LaHood was facing financial trouble when he accepted the check. The former secretary then later attempted to mislead federal agents investigating Chagoury and didn't disclose the check or who gave it to him.Chagoury, with the assistance of Baaklini and other associates, ran a complicated and illegal scheme funneling foreign money into U.S. elections. According to prosecutors, Chagoury provided $180,000 to individuals in the U.S. who gave the money to four federal political candidates from 2012 through 2016. Those candidates aren't named.LaHood wasn't involved in that scheme, prosecutors said.In a non-prosecution agreement signed in December 2019, LaHood agreed to cooperate with the government's investigation, repaid the $50,000, and paid a $40,000 fine.
A private detention center in Mesa, Ariz., is pictured in January 2016. President Biden soon after taking office signed an executive order to phase out private prisons and jails, a move that has U.S. marshals raising some concerns.Current and former officials at the U.S. Marshals Service said they are worried about an executive order from the Biden administration that phases out contracts with private prisons and jails.The order, which likely applies to 10,000 of the 60,000 people the marshals have in custody on any given day, could mean that some pretrial detainees are housed hours away from courthouses where their cases will be heard, and that marshals could be diverted from their work on fugitive task forces to transport those defendants over long distances."Transportation is the weakest link in the chain of custody," said Carl Caulk, a retired U.S. Marshals Service executive. "The longer they're being transported, the less secure it is. That's obviously a big issue for the Marshals Service and it's a big issue for me."Caulk said the phase-out of private contracts could be particularly problematic in areas where county and local jails are already overcrowded and few alternative housing sites exist. Such places include Youngstown, Ohio; in Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz.; and along the Southwest border, he said."I think consideration should be given to allowing the Marshals Service either to opt out [of the executive order] or at least extend their current arrangements well into the future so they can make other arrangements," Caulk told NPR.Biden unveiled the move on reforming the incarceration system just six days after his inauguration in January, asserting that "to decrease incarceration levels, we must reduce profit-based incentives to incarcerate by phasing out the Federal Government's reliance on privately operated criminal detention facilities."The new president pointed to a 2016 report by the Justice Department's inspector general, who found that private prisons were less secure and offered fewer redemptive and educational programs than their government-operated counterparts. That study applied only to prisons, which house people already convicted of crimes, as opposed to people awaiting trial who tend to stay in custody for shorter amounts of time and who need to be moved to court five or six times, on average, in a typical felony case.The Biden order went beyond an effort near the end of the Obama years, when then-Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates announced a plan to phase out private prisons. That directive applied only to the Federal Bureau of Prisons, not to people in pretrial detention held by the Marshals Service. The Yates plan was quickly reversed once President Donald Trump took office and his first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, rescinded the move.A former Justice Department official familiar with those actions told NPR that "ideally, DOJ would get to a point where private facilities are not used even for pretrial detention, but the greatest harm comes from the long-term facilities."Drew Wade, a spokesman for the Marshals Service, said "the U.S. Marshals Service is carefully examining its existing contracts with these facilities, mindful that any plans should avoid unnecessarily disrupting access to counsel, court appearances, and family support."
President Biden unveils his $2 trillion infrastructure measure Wednesday in Pittsburgh.President Biden's sweeping $2 trillion jobs and infrastructure plan also aims to deploy more than $5 billion to support community-based violence prevention programs.Gun violence prevention advocates are heralding the proposed funding, which is included in the measure Biden introduced in Pittsburgh on Wednesday, saying it would be a historic investment in urban communities."This could truly be transformative to the neighborhoods and the communities where these dollars are invested in," said Greg Jackson of the group Community Justice Action Fund. "We feel really confident that once these dollars are applied, and these programs — many of which have been working for decades — are properly resourced, they'll be able to turn the tide on this cycle of violence."During his campaign, Biden had promised to devote $900 million over eight years to fund evidence-based community violence prevention efforts in 40 cities across the country. As a candidate, he described gun violence as a public health epidemic. Black and brown gun violence prevention advocates pressed Biden to do more.Susan Rice, director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, told NPR that the administration decided to increase its funding commitment for these programs "because the epidemic of violence, in our cities particularly, is horrific and growing."Deaths from gun violence rose significantly in 2020, research has shown."When we had the opportunity to study this further, to look at the scope of the need, the extent of the potential for community organizations to absorb additional resources, and heard the appeal of the community leaders who have been struggling in the trenches for years without much recognition, without sufficient resources doing vitally important work, we were persuaded that this was a very worthwhile investment and one we were proud to make," Rice said.Some gun violence prevention groups had been frustrated when Biden seemed to want to focus on other priorities instead of guns after two high-profile mass shootings.Rice said the administration included this funding in the infrastructure plan because the package's goal is to give all Americans the infrastructure to compete and succeed."And part of that means taking care of those who live in our urban environments, where gun violence and violence in the community is a major impediment to economic activity and to economic growth and is obviously costing the lives of many, many innocents," Rice said. "That is essential to the well-being of our country as a whole."Erica Ford, of the organization LIFE Camp, said it is fitting that the funds are being included in a measure "that is going to rebuild the roads and the blocks that many of our children died on.""Because recovery is real, recovery for our people is real," Ford said. "And yes, it's jobs, but it's a lot of hope, and therapy, and services to help heal from the generation of death and destruction."It is not yet clear how the money would be allocated, and the package still must move through Congress, where Democrats have a slim House majority and the Senate is split 50-50, giving Vice President Harris a tiebreaking vote.Rice said that she believes that investments in community violence prevention should be directed toward "local organizations with proven track records for success," including the types of assistance that are often referred to as "wraparound services" that address the inequities that make gun violence more likely.Rice said the administration wants to work with Congress on the legislative language, but it is "confident that there are many potential channels that would be significant and meaningful to get this money out to those who can use it best."Gun violence prevention advocates like Fatimah Loren Dreier of the Health Alliance for Violence Intervention share that goal."It's incredibly important that these funds be directed to communities that are disproportionately impacted by violence, and that there is ease of access for community-based organizations that are doing the most effective work on the ground," she said. "We can't emphasize enough that we want to make this a frictionless transfer of resources to those who are doing the most powerful work."The announcement comes as the nation has been plunged into renewed debate over the nation's gun laws, spurred by deadly shootings in Boulder, Colo., and the Atlanta area. But before those mass shootings, members of the Biden administration, including Rice, had already been holding meetings with key stakeholders focused on the issue — an attempt to deliberately plan action to prevent gun violence, rather than reacting to tragedy.Many Black and brown community violence prevention leaders have raised concerns that urban gun violence has not historically been a part of the conversation in the policymaking process."Those stigmas that are attached and how it's always been a push after other types of murders, and ours is always swept under the rug, has always made me feel like, you know, the lives and the blood of our children was not equivalent to others'," said Oresa Williams of Not Another Child. "But this has brought so much meaning."Williams thanked Biden "for allowing his empathy to show through action."The administration's inclusion of funding for community violence prevention initiatives was also praised by establishment gun groups."Community violence prevention programs work with and within communities to mediate conflict and stop violence from ever occurring," said Kris Brown, the president of Brady. "Such programs target the multiple causes of violence and do so without policing communities, taking a holistic, public health approach to this issue. Following the pronounced increase in gun violence last year, this funding will help communities that need it most."And John Feinblatt, the president of Everytown for Gun Safety, praised the Biden proposal as "extraordinary" but called on the administration to multitask."To meaningfully reduce gun violence, we have to both close the loopholes in our gun laws and invest in proven solutions," Feinblatt said. "Congress should move quickly on both tracks to deliver the results the public deserves."
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security Northwest Detention Center is pictured in Tacoma, Wash., in 2017. It's now called the Northwest ICE Processing Center.The sprawling detention center in Tacoma, Wash., housed more than 1,300 immigrants on average at the height of former President Donald Trump's immigration crackdown. Now nearly four out of every five beds at the facility are empty.That's because Immigration and Customs Enforcement released hundreds of people to lower the risk of COVID-19, and because the agency is arresting and detaining fewer unauthorized immigrants under orders from President Biden.But that doesn't translate into savings for the U.S. government — or the American taxpayer. In fact, because of the way ICE structures its contracts with private companies and localities that own and operate the detention centers, the agency guarantees it will pay for a minimum number of beds whether they are filled or not.For dozens of detention centers across the country with these "guaranteed minimums," ICE pays more than $1 million a day for empty detention beds, according to an NPR analysis."The numbers that we have right now on detention are the lowest they've been in 20 years," said Silky Shah, executive director of the nonprofit Detention Watch Network. "But we have the capacity for a lot more, and a lot of those beds continue to get paid for."Beyond the Southwest border, where temporary holding facilities are overflowing with unauthorized migrants and children, the Biden administration faces a very different challenge in the interior of the country.After the number of undocumented immigrants in detention peaked under Trump at more than 55,000, the pandemic hit and President Biden won the election. Since then, the number of immigrants in ICE detention has plummeted to just over 14,000, as immigration detention centers have emptied out.ICE and the detention companies argue that a guaranteed revenue stream is needed in order to keep operations going.But these deals have been controversial for years. In February, a government watchdog agency criticized how ICE awards detention contracts.Now ICE is paying for more unused space than ever before, and a larger national debate has been heating up about whether the government should be locking up many of these immigrants in the first place.Critics say this isn't just about money but about the morality of putting immigrants behind bars for civil violations. Many ICE detainees have not been convicted of any crimes.Shah, from Detention Watch Network, wants to see this system dismantled, and she says having so many guaranteed beds makes that harder."I think that's a real question for the administration," Shah said. "Do they want to continue to detain people because of what the Trump administration put in place? Or do they want to actually move towards the more morally appropriate position of actually not detaining tons of people."ICE does not own or operate most of the facilities in its detention network. Instead, the agency contracts with a patchwork of private operators and county jails. The agency says it guarantees it will pay for about 29,000 beds per day.This story is playing out across the country. At the Northwest ICE Processing Center in Tacoma run by the private detention company GEO Group, the daily detainee population has plunged. But ICE is still paying for about 800 beds that are empty."It used to be really, really bustling," said immigration attorney Alison Hollinz, who would wait hours to visit with clients in the past.Now Hollinz gets a front-row parking spot and walks right through an empty waiting room. After a recent visit, she said, "There were a total of two attorney visits today, which is very, very different from how it used to be."ICE said in a statement that predicting how many immigrants will be detained is a "complex challenge." According to ICE, it's a mistake to draw conclusions about its contracting process during a pandemic that has forced the agency to comply with social distancing guidelines in its detention facilities.The nonpartisan Government Accountability Office published a report earlier this year documenting a significant jump in the number of guaranteed minimum beds ICE agreed to in detention contracts signed during the Trump administration."ICE has not taken a strategic approach to these decisions," the GAO found, "and has spent millions of dollars a month on unused detention space."In preparing its report, the GAO interviewed ICE's own staff in a number of field offices around the country, and even they raised red flags about these deals that locked in more guaranteed payments."They viewed these contracts and agreements where they included guaranteed minimums as not always being in the best interest of the government," said the GAO's Rebecca Gambler, who oversaw the report, in an interview.The number of guaranteed beds in ICE's detention system grew 45% during the Trump administration, according to the GAO report. As of mid-May 2020, the GAO found that ICE was paying for more than 12,000 empty beds per day, at a cost of more than $20 million a month.But ICE's leadership in Washington is pushing back.The GAO's findings "lack context," ICE said in a statement, because the watchdog agency doesn't take into account the "dramatic fluctuations" in the number of immigrants ICE detained between 2018, when arrests surged, and 2020, when the pandemic struck and authorities released thousands of detainees.The sudden drop in the detained population is not at all what Trump administration officials expected. In a FY2021 budget proposal from the Department of Homeland Security, ICE requested funding for 60,000 detention beds at a cost of $3.1 billion. The agency received funding for 34,000 beds.ICE defends the use of guaranteed minimums, arguing they help the agency negotiate a lower rate per detainee.ICE "is committed to ensuring that all those in our custody reside in safe, secure, and humane environments and under appropriate conditions of confinement," the agency said in a statement. "Guaranteed minimums allow the federal government to procure beds at a reduced rate and ultimately save the taxpayer money."The private companies that operate these detention facilities like guaranteed minimums, too."You can't just scale up and scale down very quickly in any of our federal facilities," said George Zoley, the founder and CEO of GEO Group, one of the private detention companies that together account for 80% of ICE's detention beds.On an earnings call with investors in February, Zoley explained that these operators are required by ICE to have a certain number of people on staff — and that staffing up can't be done quickly."That's because it takes so long through the clearance process to bring any new employee on board. It's a matter of several weeks if not months," Zoley said.Zoley also said that while the pandemic clobbered the nation's economy, these minimum payments helped cushion the blow for GEO Group."It could have been much worse if there weren't for some of these guarantees," Zoley said.Immigrant advocates have long argued that these deals are good for the private detention industry — and bad for immigrant communities and taxpayers.In 2017, Congress agreed to drop a requirement that ICE maintain a minimum number of detention beds. Then President Trump ramped up his immigration crackdown — and ICE continued to write guaranteed minimums into its contracts anyway.Now activists see a new opportunity with President Biden in the White House.During the campaign, Biden's platform said that the federal government "should not use private facilities for any detention, including detention of undocumented immigrants." And when he took office, the president moved to phase out privately run federal prisons within the Justice Department.But so far, he has not moved to address immigration detention.
Yuri Kochiyama speaks at an anti-war demonstration in New York City's Central Park around 1968.On March 5, 1965, LIFE Magazine published an article on the assassination of Malcolm X. The article was accompanied by a photo of Malcolm X lying on the floor—his white button-down shirt ripped open and stained red with blood—moments after the fatal shots were fired. In the photo is a woman kneeling on the ground, her hands holding up Malcolm's head, appearing to give him comfort in his dying moments. There is no mention of who the bespectacled woman is or her relation to Malcolm X in the article, but that woman remembered that tragic moment vividly. Her name is Yuri Kochiyama.A Japanese American activist whose early political awakenings came while incarcerated in the concentration camps of World War II America, Kochiyama dedicated her life to social justice and liberation movements. As hate crimes against Asian American Pacific Islanders surge, Throughline reflects on Yuri Kochiyama's ideas around the Asian American struggle, and what solidarity and intersectionality can mean for all struggles.Co-hosts Rund Abdelfatah and Ramtin Arablouei spoke to Diane Fujino, professor of Asian American studies at UC Berkeley and author of the book, Heartbeat of Struggle: The Revolutionary Life of Yuri Kochiyama. Fujino had the opportunity to interview Yuri Kochiyama multiple times for her biography. Below are highlights from a conversation with Fujino on the latest episode of Throughline. The conversation has been edited for length and clarity.On the detaining of Japanese Americans during WWII:DIANE FUJINO: It helped her to recognize herself as a Japanese American. This is what Yuri says. And to see the strength of the Japanese American community and to survive as not just individuals, but to come together as a community. You know people grew gardens, right? They figured out how to put up partitions in the bathrooms, to have a little privacy and dignity. There was so much that that happened. There were protests inside the concentration camps. She listened to discussions of more politicized Japanese Americans inside the camps. And I would say she started to grow a social consciousness, a sense that problems in the United States had social and structural origins.RUND ABDELFATAH: I noticed that you called what are typically referred to as Japanese internment camps, concentration camps. And I wonder if that was intentional and why you decided to use that term?FUJINO: Evacuation refers to moving to safety but that's not what happened. It was forced, right? It was done through racial profiling and racism against a group who were the descendants of supposedly the enemy and, yet, we know that mass incarceration didn't happen for Germans and Italian Americans. And so what the Japanese American activist community has called upon for decades is that they be called concentration camps. And when people say, well, doesn't that diminish what happened in Nazi Germany? The response has been that those were death camps, but these, that Yuri and Japanese Americans were placed in, were concentration camps. There was barbed wire, there were sentries, they were forced to move to be placed into them. Their freedoms were limited.On how Kochiyama became involved in activism while living in Harlem:FUJINO: She became an activist and an organizer in her 40s as the mother of six children. She got involved in supporting better quality schools for the children of Harlem, now including her own children. And then she got involved in a labor struggle at a medical site where they were going to build a new medical building and were doing their typical discrimination in hiring. She was following the news of the Civil Rights Movement unfolding on television and in the newspapers. And she was seeing things like water cannons blasting peaceful Black protesters, dogs being sicced on peaceful Black protesters.RAMTIN ARABLOUEI: In a moment like we're living through right now where it feels like every few months it feels like a new group of people, whether Black Americans or Asian Americans, or for a time it was Muslim or Middle Eastern Americans, or of course Native Americans are targeted, what does her example tell us about the need to see that connectivity between the groups that are being targeted?FUJINO: Yes, I think that there are two crucial lessons: The first one is this need for solidarity that we cannot only look to the interests of our own people. First of all, who are our own people? Many of us cross multiple groups and at the same time, working only out of self-interest gets us in a trap. It's like the model minority myth where we work out of self-interest but the gains that one group makes come at the expense of other groups. This is not a model of liberation. It's a very problematic model and one that Yuri always resisted. [She] always said and operated by the ethos that my people's liberation is intricately linked to your people's liberation. I cannot be free if you're not free. We need to think about how things impact the most vulnerable among us and work out of those best interests.The second thing that I think is really crucial here is that we cannot just work in reactionary ways every time there's an incident--a new incident of an attack on Asian Americans, yet another police killing of an unarmed Black person, or attacks against indigenous peoples and their lands and waters--this gets us nowhere. It's a constant battle and it's exhausting. And what's most important is that we build movements for liberation.If you would like to learn more about Yuri Kochiyama:
People gather during a demonstration outside the Hennepin County Government Center in Minneapolis on Monday as opening statements were given in the trial of former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, charged in the killing of George Floyd.Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin's trial began this week. He's accused of murdering Minneapolis resident George Floyd in May of 2020, when Chauvin was recorded kneeling on Floyd's neck for nearly 10 minutes.

NPR's Adrian Florido has been covering the trial and reports from Minneapolis.

In participating regions, you'll also hear from local journalists about what's happening in your community.

Email us at considerthis@npr.org.This episode was produced by Brent Baughman, Brianna Scott and Lee Hale. It was edited by Sami Yenigun with help from Wynne Davis. Our executive producer is Cara Tallo.Catch up on the latest headlines and unique NPR stories, sent every weekday.By subscribing, you agree to NPR's terms of use and privacy policy. NPR may share your name and email address with your NPR station. See Details. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
Demonstrators show support for Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro in front of the presidential palace Monday in Brasilia. Bolsonaro reshuffled his Cabinet amid turmoil in his administration and dropping approval ratings over the coronavirus pandemic.A major reshuffling of the government continues in Brazil as the Ministry of Defense announced that the commanders of the army, navy and air force will each be replaced.The shake-up began Monday when Foreign Minister Ernesto Araújo tendered his resignation. A few hours later, Defense Minister Fernando Azevedo e Silva said that he too was leaving the government.Brazil's right-wing populist president, Jair Bolsonaro, is under intense pressure and mounting criticism as Brazil's coronavirus cases spin further out of control. The departures accompany lawmakers' threats to impeach Bolsonaro as well as his dropping popularity with the public.As NPR's Philip Reeves has reported, the country is now widely seen as the epicenter of the pandemic. More than 313,000 people have died there — more than any country but the United States.Brazil reported 526,089 new cases over the past week, and 18,441 new deaths, according to the Johns Hopkins coronavirus tracker. It saw a record high number of cases on March 25, when there were more 100,000 new confirmed cases in one day. The following day, 3,650 deaths from COVID-19 were reported.The dismissal of the armed forces chiefs was announced Tuesday at a meeting attended by the newly appointed defense minister, Walter Braga Netto; Azevedo, the former minister; and the departing commanders, according to a statement from the Defense Ministry.Bolsonaro is a retired army captain, and he has packed his government with military officials. He spoke recently about using the military to oppose lockdowns and other pandemic restrictions. When Azevedo left on Monday, he made clear he's against politicizing Brazil's military; now the service chiefs are following him out of the administration.The resignation of the far-right Araújo as foreign minister came after the country's diplomats and members of Congress accused him of tarnishing Brazil's standing and putting it in a poor position to obtain vaccines from other countries.As The Guardian noted, under Araújo, Brazil fell in line with nationalist leaders such as former President Donald Trump and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán. The country lost its reputation for taking climate change seriously, and it also damaged its relationship with China.Bolsonaro, who himself recovered from COVID-19, has in the past referred to the coronavirus as the "communavirus" and as "a little flu." He has not mounted a significant national response to the pandemic and has not introduced any national lockdown measures. His administration also sought to block restrictions put in place by state governments, though that effort was rejected by the Supreme Court.There are concerns that Brazil's negligent approach to the virus has allowed new variants to evolve that will likely spread beyond its borders.NPR Brazil correspondent Philip Reeves contributed to this report.
Thousands of supporters of former President Donald Trump storm the U.S. Capitol following a "Stop the Steal" rally on Jan. 6. Prosecutors are working on hundreds of charges related to the breach.For nearly three months, federal investigators have been digging to get to the bottom of a major question hanging over the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol: Was it planned and coordinated?The public has begun to see pieces of an answer to that question in recent weeks through court filings and statements from prosecutors. Those materials do not — at this point — show that those in the pro-Trump mob that stormed the Capitol on Jan. 6 had a clear, coherent plan ahead of time to breach the building, according to an NPR review.Instead, the public record suggests there were several smaller groups of people with ties to extremist organizations who coordinated ahead of time and traveled to Washington, D.C., ready for violence, but not with the explicitly stated goal of storming the Capitol."There have already been conspiracy charges, small, I would call them, sort of small cells of individuals working together, coordinating their travel, etc.," FBI Director Christopher Wray told NPR this month. "I don't think we've seen some national conspiracy, but we're going to keep digging."Former prosecutors caution that it is still early in the investigation and authorities may uncover evidence that points to advance planning to breach the Capitol. There was, for instance, chatter online ahead of Jan. 6 about targeting Congress, although anonymous talk on social media doesn't necessarily reflect concrete steps for action.Investigators are still sifting through mountains of evidence that includes thousands of videos, text messages and other electronic communications as they work to get a better understanding of how Jan. 6 happened. Wray and others have said that those efforts will yield a fuller picture with time.Here's what we know about the conspiracy cases so far, according to the court filings and hearings:About two dozen people are facing conspiracy charges at this point, which is a sliver of the more than 300 people who have been charged in connection with the Capitol riot.The Justice Department has brought at least six separate Capitol conspiracy cases. One of them is tied to an attack on law enforcement officers, including a U.S. Capitol Police officer who later died.The others involve members or associates of two far-right extremist groups — the Oath Keepers and the Proud Boys — that have become a focus for investigators.Those cases have been charged as separate conspiracies, although prosecutors presented evidence this month suggesting the two groups were in communication ahead of Jan. 6.The biggest conspiracy case so far involves the Oath Keepers. Ten alleged members and associates of the anti-government, paramilitary group are accused of conspiring to disrupt Congress' certification of the Electoral College vote count.Prosecutors allege that the defendants had extensive discussions in the days and weeks leading up to Trump's "Stop The Steal" rally on Jan. 6 about their plans for the day itself.Government lawyers cite Facebook chats and text messages in which the defendants talk about what kind of weapons and gear to bring to Washington, D.C., what kind of clothes to wear. They also discuss using handheld radios to communicate.One of the most alarming allegations the government has made is that the defendants had plans for a "quick reaction force," or QRF, to be stationed with weapons across the Potomac River in Virginia. The idea, according to court documents, was to have a force ready to speed into Washington, D.C., if things downtown got, as one defendant said, "heavy."The government has cited texts from a group chat called "DC OP: Jan 6 21" on the encrypted messaging app Signal. Members of the group chat included at least two of the defendants and the Oath Keepers' founder, Stewart Rhodes. In that chat, Rhodes — identified as Person One — suggests that members bring a collapsible baton, gloves, eye protection and a helmet.The group texts, however, don't provide a direct line to plans to breach the Capitol."There is no discussion of forcibly entering the Capitol until January 6, 2021," the government said in its filing disclosing the texts. "However, there is talk about being prepared for violence."On Jan. 6 itself, several of the defendants are accused of taking part in a military-style "stack" formation to push up the steps of the Capitol and into the building. Prosecutors say Rhodes had a 97-second phone call with one of the defendants, Kelly Meggs, minutes before that happened.That evening, Rhodes allegedly messaged the group: "Leaders check to be sure you have all your team members. If anyone is missing, post here."Rhodes, who founded the Oath Keepers in 2009, has not been charged, although investigators are scrutinizing his role.The defendants who have appeared in federal court in Washington, D.C., have pleaded not guilty.Prosecutors have also brought conspiracy cases against members or associates of the Proud Boys, a far-right, nationalist group that has engaged in street fighting.Ethan Nordean, with backward baseball hat and bullhorn, leads members of the far-right group Proud Boys in marching before the riot at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6.The most notable case is against four alleged leaders of the group—Ethan Nordean, Joseph Biggs, Zach Rehl and Charles Donohoe.According to court papers, the men communicated on an encrypted messaging app about their plans for Jan. 6. The day before the riot, a new encrypted messaging channel titled "Boots on the Ground" was set up for Proud Boys in Washington, D.C. The four defendants and more than 50 people were in the channel, prosecutors say.According to court papers, the participants discussed the use of handheld radios on Jan. 6. They talked about getting them programmed for the right frequency. They also were told not to wear the Proud Boys' traditional black and yellow colors.Members of the channel were told to meet at the Washington Monument the following morning at 10 a.m. The defendants and other Proud Boys did show up at the appointed time and from there marched to the Capitol, where prosecutors say they busted through police lines and forced their way into the Capitol.Nordean and Biggs have both pleaded not guilty. The other two defendants have yet to enter a plea.Since the pro-Trump mob bashed its way through the police and overran the Capitol, questions have swirled about whether there was a larger conspiracy, and if so, how far up it went.Prosecutors have not alleged an overarching conspiracy at this point, although investigators are looking into that possibility.There are indications, however, of contacts between Oath Keepers and Proud Boys.Prosecutors have produced evidence that one of the defendants in the Oath Keepers case, Kelly Meggs, claimed to be coordinating with the Proud Boys and a far-right extremist militia to form an "alliance" on Jan. 6. The nature of any alleged agreement is unclear from the court document, and there is no mention of a plan to storm the Capitol.While the full scope of any advance planning is still murky, what is clear is that the Capitol riot investigation is massive in scope. Even now, nearly three months after the breach, investigators are sorting through evidence and chasing down leads as they build out their cases."I think the fact that he brought charges against 300 people in under three months is really quite extraordinary," said Tom Firestone, a former federal prosecutor who's now with the law firm Baker McKenzie. "There's never been a case like that in U.S. history."
Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson is seen as a possible Supreme Court justice, should a vacancy arise in the Biden years.Ketanji Brown Jackson, nominated Tuesday to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, is among the top contenders for a seat on the Supreme Court, if there is a vacancy in the Biden years.If confirmed to the D.C. appeals court, she would take the place of Merrick Garland, who resigned when he was confirmed as U.S. attorney general. Jackson has served as a federal district court judge since 2013 and was on former President Barack Obama's Supreme Court shortlist in 2016.Back then, she was a long shot. Not this time. President Biden has pledged that he will name an African American woman to the Supreme Court if there is a vacancy, and Jackson would be a top contender were it to happen.Jackson, 50, ticks off just about every box that liberals might want in a nominee, and some that conservatives would want, too. Raised in Miami, she was a national oratory champion in high school, then graduated with honors from Harvard College and Harvard Law School, where she was an editor of the law review.She clerked for three federal judges, including Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer, now 82, who is the most likely member of the high court to step down, though he has given no indication that he plans to do so.Whereas four members of the current Supreme Court served at one time as prosecutors, Jackson was a public defender, representing indigent defendants. She also practiced in law firms big and small, and served as vice chairman of the U.S. Sentencing Commission at a time when it sought to reduce the draconian penalties that had been in place for crack cocaine.Jackson's parents were both public school teachers until her father became a lawyer, and her mother, eventually, a school principal. The judge met her husband, Patrick Jackson, at Harvard College. He was, she says, her first, "serious boyfriend," and has remained that ever since.At first blush, they look like an improbable couple.As she put it in a charming — and candid — speech at the University of Georgia law school in March 2017, "Patrick is a quintessential 'Boston Brahmin' — his family can be traced back to England before the Mayflower. ... He and his twin brother are, in fact, the sixth generation in their family to graduate from Harvard College. By contrast, I am only the second generation in my family to go to any college, and I am fairly certain that if you traced my family lineage back past my grandparents — who were raised in Georgia, by the way — you would find that my ancestors were slaves on both sides."Federal Judge Patti Saris, who hired Jackson as a law clerk straight out of law school, recalls Dr. Jackson, who now looks full-on prep, as less so back then. At the time, he was a surgical resident at Massachusetts General Hospital, but he was so fascinated by his wife's work that he would often go to the courtroom after a long night on call to watch what was going on. As Saris remembers, the young doctor had often been up for 24-plus hours and looked incredibly scruffy, sitting in the back of the courtroom. Finally, one day, the judge's courtroom marshal came up to her and whispered, "Judge, would you like me to remove the homeless man in the back row?"In her University of Georgia speech, Judge Jackson talked about her two teenage daughters and the "whiplash" between her two roles — on the one hand being a federal district judge, "which means people generally treat me with respect ... and I control what happens in my courtroom." And, on the other, her maternal role in which "my daughters make it very clear that as far as they are concerned, I know nothing and should not tell them anything; much less, give them any orders — that is if they talk to me at all."She also talked about the difficulties of balancing work as a litigator in a large law firm and family responsibilities."I think it is not possible to overstate the degree of difficulty that many young women, and especially new mothers, face in the law firm context," she said in the speech. "The hours are long; the workflow unpredictable; you have little control over your time and schedule; and you start to feel as though the demands of the billable hour are constantly in conflict with the needs of your children and your family responsibilities."There are many women who are well-suited to these pressures, she said. "I discovered early on that I was not."She did eventually find happiness at a large firm doing appellate work, from there became vice chair of the sentencing commission, and in 2012 Obama nominated her to become a federal district judge.But, as she has noted, the chances of her actually getting her "dream job" depended entirely on events beyond her control, namely Obama's reelection."And when you add that to the fact that I am related by marriage to [the then] House Speaker Paul Ryan, who was then running for vice president against President Obama, you get the idea of what that period of time was like for me," she recalled.In her eight years as a federal district court judge, Jackson has amassed a record in a variety of regulatory cases. But her most prominent decision came when she ordered President Donald Trump's former White House counsel Don McGahn to appear before the House Judiciary Committee, to testify about possible obstruction of justice by Trump.McGahn had been a star witness in special prosecutor Robert Mueller's investigation, and the House committee wanted to question him to determine if there were grounds for impeachment. But Trump ordered McGahn not to testify and the committee went to court to enforce its subpoena.In a lengthy decision, Jackson rejected Trump's argument that a president's close advisers and former advisers like McGahn are absolutely immune to demands that they appear and testify before Congress.That immunity "simply does not exist," Jackson wrote. "Presidents are not kings. This means that they do not have subjects bound by loyalty or blood, whose destiny they are entitled to control. Rather, in this land of liberty, it is indisputable that current and former employees of the White House work for the people of the United States."The Trump administration appealed and the case is still pending.
China's President Xi Jinping (C) applauds with other leaders and delegates after they voted on changes to Hong Kong's election system during the closing session of the National People's Congress at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on March 11, 2021.Chinese officials approved a major overhaul to Hong Kong's electoral system on Tuesday that will change how elected officials are chosen in Hong Kong. The new electoral law establishes near-total control by Beijing in choosing Hong Kong's leaders.The sweeping changes allow Beijing to vet candidates for Hong Kong's legislative council and election committee, which chooses the region's chief executive. That would guarantee Beijing-aligned majorities in each body.The vetting committee responsible for selecting candidates will rely on information provided by the police's national security office, effectively blocking known pro-democracy protestors from joining.Hong Kong has never been an electoral democracy, but under the region's Basic Law — a mini-constitution adopted after the region's return to Chinese rule in 1997 — residents were given the ability to vote for local district councilors and directly elect half of the region's legislators.The electoral overhaul amounts to Beijing's latest move to enact more control over Hong Kong, a city where pro-democracy protestors took to the streets for months to object to mainland China growing dominance.The measures approved Tuesday were expected, since China's legislature debated the policy changes earlier this month. The steps taken this week by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress were largely a formality.
The January siege of the U.S. Capitol is forcing lawmakers and top agency officials to pivot to find out about future threats before individuals and groups with extreme views try to mount new attacks.Michigan congresswoman Elissa Slotkin says the end date for America's singular focus on threats from foreign terrorists has come and gone."January 6, for me, kind of capped the end of the post-9/11 era," says the former CIA analyst who served in Iraq and personally briefed both George W. Bush on Barack Obama on foreign terror threats.As chair of a House Homeland Security subcommittee, Slotkin says the Capitol attack proves combating domestic violent extremism has to be America's number one national security priority.The second-term Democrat is now coordinating with the White House on possible executive orders to address the threat — such as new rules and regulations to make the national terrorist watch list a stronger tool in the fight against homegrown extremists. Slotkin, who recently hosted a hearing with state attorneys general on the issue, says she is also weighing whether the U.S. needs a new domestic terrorism czar who would serve in a role under the Director of National Intelligence.It's part of a new wave of efforts that Slotkin and other Democrats say were stymied when former President Trump was in office. But with President Biden now in the White House, and growing consensus about the severity of the threat, Slotkin says badly needed action could soon become a reality."Unlike a year ago where our committee was really, in many ways, spitting into the wind vis-à-vis the Trump administration, we have an open door from the Biden administration, who has taken this on in a serious way," says Slotkin.The January siege of the Capitol is forcing lawmakers and top agency heads to pivot to find out about future threats before individuals and groups with extreme views, such as violent white supremacists, try to mount new attacks.By now, more than 300 people have been charged by federal prosecutors in connection to the riot, and about two dozen with ties to militias and right wing extremist groups face conspiracy charges."The Trump administration wasn't interested in dealing with this problem with the seriousness that it deserved, although you would have comments by acting secretaries that domestic terrorism is the number one terrorist threat," says Michigan Democrat Gary Peters, the chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee. "We didn't see that actually translate into resources and priorities."Peters says he raised the issue repeatedly when he was the top Democrat on the committee and the GOP controlled the chamber. Fast forward to today, he says that Democrats can finally take action now that they control the White House and hold majorities in both the House and the Senate.For some time, Peters and other Democrats have pressed to make domestic terrorism the top national security priority. And even in a mostly polarized Congress, he says there's potential to work with Republicans on a number of specific policies."It's clear we'll now have an opportunity to address this issue," says Peters, who plans to hold a hearing in the coming weeks focused on homegrown threats.For example, Peters says unlike with previous Trump cabinet officials, he's in close contact with key players in the Biden administration, such as new Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas."We have to have a better understanding of what these groups are up to, who they are, how they are constituted, what's the extent of the threat," Peters says. "And that means we have to have intelligence resources that are focused on this."As chair of a House Homeland Security subcommittee, Elissa Slotkin, D-Mich., says the Capitol attack proves combating domestic violent extremism has to be America's number one national security priority. Above, Slotkin questions witnesses during a hearing on threats to the homeland in September 2020.Both Peters and Slotkin bring a unique perspective to the issue as Michiganders. Their state has proven to be the canary in the coal mine, according to Slotkin.Last year, armed protestors crowded inside Michigan's State Capitol building to protest the state's coronavirus restrictions. A few months later, several men tied to an extremist group were charged in a plot to abduct Gov. Gretchen Whitmer."We are living this in a very real way," Slotkin says. "And so it wasn't designed this way, but I think it's important that we have so many Michiganders kind of at the cutting edge of dealing with this issue."Slotkin, Peters and other lawmakers say they are poised to craft policy to better equip agencies such as the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security's intelligence arm to focus more on homegrown extremists.And much in the same way that reviews of the 9/11 security failures prompted reforms, they want to find ways to ensure these agencies can better share intelligence with other law enforcement groups.While finding bipartisan consensus has proved challenging, some key Republicans, including Ohio's Rob Portman, the top Republican on the Senate Homeland Security Committee, agree with the need for action. And along with Democrats, they say there's potential to shape new policy across the aisle."I think that's one where there's a lot of — I hope — there's a lot of bipartisan consensus," Portman says.He and other lawmakers say they're moving to take action after hearing recent testimony from FBI Director Christopher Wray and Mayorkas, the Homeland Security chief, who both agree now's the time to redouble efforts.Texas Congressman Michael McCaul, the top Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, says he's reintroducing a bill that would apply similar criminal charges to international and domestic terrorists."The FBI fully supports this as well. We worked very closely with them to address this issue," McCaul says. "It would give prosecutors an additional tool."Back in the Senate, Portman and other Republicans disagree their party did not do enough to address domestic terrorism during the Trump era. For example, Portman notes the GOP was able to increase funding in some key areas to address this concern.And now, as lawmakers in the House remain deadlocked on the creation of an outside commission to investigate Jan. 6 — similar in makeup to the 9/11 Commission — Portman notes how the Senate Homeland Security and Rules committees are working on a bipartisan probe of their own.Portman also agrees with Democrats that ramping up a focus on domestic extremism is more than just giving federal law enforcement agencies more money. He and others say it's about coordination, too."The funding is one thing," Portman says, "but a lot of these groups tell me they just need to know how do you better protect."
Three of Deepwater Wind's turbines stand off Block Island, R.I., in 2016. The Biden administration is pushing for a sharp increase in offshore wind energy development along the East Coast.As the White House slows down fossil fuel development on public lands and offshore, it's ramping up renewable energy with a push to jump-start the offshore wind energy business. Monday's announcement is part of President Biden's effort to fulfill the ambitious climate plan he campaigned on, including making the nation's electricity sector carbon neutral by 2035.As with much of Biden's climate message, a key focus is on creating jobs."President Biden believes we have an enormous opportunity in front of us to not only address the threats of climate change, but use it as a chance to create millions of good-paying, union jobs that will fuel America's economic recovery," White House National Climate Adviser Gina McCarthy said in a statement before the announcement.The Interior Department plans to start selling leases later this year for a new "wind energy area" in the New York Bight, the relatively shallow waters between Long Island and the New Jersey coast.A study last summer by the research firm Wood Mackenzie showed that constructing offshore wind turbines there would support about 32,000 jobs from 2022 to 2030. It also found it would support about 6,000 permanent jobs.The National Ocean Industries Association, which represents offshore wind as well as oil companies, praised the announcement, saying the benefits will be felt across the country. "In areas like the Gulf Coast, you will find steel fabricators, heavy lift vessel operators, subsea construction companies, helicopter service providers and more who built their experience in the oil and gas industry but will be vital in building offshore wind," Erik Milito, the association's president, said in a statement.Louisiana's governor has proposed developing wind energy in the Gulf of Mexico.Interior Secretary Deb Haaland said the country needs to boost the offshore wind industry because "for generations, we've put off the transition to clean energy, and now we're facing a climate crisis." Scientists said most of the world's fossil fuels will need to stay in the ground to avoid the worst effects of climate change.In the future, the administration wants to see a thriving offshore wind industry up and down the East Coast, in the Gulf of Mexico and along the West Coast. It's setting a target of employing tens of thousands more workers to deploy 30 gigawatts of turbines by 2030. That's enough to meet the demand of more than 10 million American homes for a year, according to the White House.Also Monday, the Interior Department announced plans to complete reviews for at least 16 more areas where offshore wind could be developed by 2025. That will require new investments in ports, and new factories to build wind turbines and parts. The administration's eventual goal is for the U.S. to generate 110 gigawatts of electricity offshore by 2050.Massachusetts, New York and New Jersey all have their own plans for a domestic offshore wind industry. New Jersey announced in January plans for a "wind port" to supply projects along the East Coast.The Interior Department's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management already is working on environmental reviews for the Vineyard Wind project off Massachusetts and South Fork Wind off Rhode Island. The bureau announced Monday it will start preparing an environmental impact statement for the Ocean Wind project off New Jersey.The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration also has signed an agreement with Ocean Wind's Danish developer Ørsted to share environmental data, such as ocean mapping.One challenge new offshore wind projects face is local opposition. The group Save Our Shoreline NJ has opposed the Ocean Wind project, saying it would hurt local tourism, recreation and commercial fishing industries. The administration said $1 million in grants will be available to study effects on fishing and local communities.The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management hopes to speed up environmental reviews for these projects by removing the most contentious areas from consideration.As part of Monday's announcement, the Department of Energy also plans to offer $3 billion in government-backed loans to the offshore wind industry. It expects to award $8 million to 15 research and development projects through an existing program.
Drew Lehman of Lansdale, Pa., became unable to work after a traumatic car accident. He is currently navigating the confusing, bureaucratic process of getting his federal student loans discharged.The U.S. Department of Education says it will erase the federal student loan debts of tens of thousands of borrowers who can no longer work because they have significant disabilities. It's a small but important step toward improving a shambolic, bureaucratic process for hundreds of thousands of vulnerable borrowers who are legally entitled to debt relief, but haven't received it.The announcement comes more than a year after an NPR investigation found just 28% of eligible borrowers had their loans erased, or were on track to, through the "Total and Permanent Disability Discharge" program. The U.S. Government Accountability Office and a bipartisan group of lawmakers had previously decried the program's ineffectiveness.According to the department, more than 41,000 borrowers who have permanent disabilities will have roughly $1.3 billion in student debts conditionally discharged. These borrowers have already had their loans erased once before, only to have the debts restored during the pandemic after they failed to submit required income-monitoring paperwork correctly.The department also announced that, for the duration of the pandemic, it will not require borrowers currently in income-monitoring to submit annual paperwork. Borrowers whose loans have been discharged due to Monday's announcement will still have to complete this monitoring process."Waiving these requirements will ensure no borrower who is totally and permanently disabled risks having to repay their loans simply because they could not submit paperwork," said Education Secretary Miguel Cardona.The announcement is good news for borrowers whose disabilities prevent them from working to pay down their debts. But several borrower advocates reacted with frustration."Today's announcement is not cause for celebration but rather for outrage," Persis Yu, director of the Student Loan Borrower Assistance Project at the National Consumer Law Center, said in a statement. "It is scandalous that the Department revoked the loan discharges for 41,000 borrowers with total and permanent disabilities due to paperwork issues during a pandemic. While we are glad that the Department has rectified this injustice, we should not cheer for the Department re-cancelling loans that should have never been reinstated."If you're confused, so are thousands of borrowers. Let us explain:For over half a century, federal law has promised student debt relief to borrowers who can no longer work to support themselves because of a severe, permanent disability. But, in December 2019, an NPR review of federal data revealed that just 28% of eligible borrowers — identified between March 2016 and September 2019 — were getting the relief they're entitled to.Even worse: Of the 365,000 potentially eligible borrowers who had not gotten relief by June 2019, more than half — 225,000 — had defaulted on their loans, an Education Department official told NPR at the time.Why are so many incredibly vulnerable borrowers not receiving the debt relief they're legally entitled to?First, relief isn't automatic. Borrowers have to ask for it. Advocates say the government's reliance on borrowers to respond to a notice of eligibility — rather than providing debt relief automatically — allows many borrowers to slip through the cracks."A lot of folks have disabilities that, frankly, prevent them from going through the process," Persis Yu told NPR in 2019. For example, a borrower with memory loss, or a borrower who may require long hospital stays, may struggle to keep up with paperwork.What's more, NPR found in 2019 that tens of thousands of borrowers who did ask for help and had their loans conditionally discharged — later had their debts reinstated. That's because borrowers also have to submit annual paperwork, for three years, documenting their income. This was added to limit the potential for fraud, but the process has been poorly managed and can be fundamentally confusing for borrowers who are not working or earning income.So confusing, in fact, that NPR found of the 200,000 borrowers who began the income-monitoring period between March 2016 and September 2019, 75,000 later failed out of the program and had their debts reinstated, most because they simply failed to submit this income paperwork."The irony is that you have to work really hard to prove that you're unable to work," Yu said.In 2016, the Government Accountability Office reviewed the loan discharge process and found this income-monitoring period to be a significant obstacle for borrowers."It begins this sort of bureaucratic circle where you first apply, then you get kicked out, then you come back in through appeal, and it's understandably frustrating," Allison Bawden, who led that GAO review, told NPR in 2019.Borrower Drew Lehman has had a taste of that frustration."They wouldn't tell me what I need to do to fix it. They just kept sending [my income paperwork] back, saying there was something wrong with it," says Lehman, who was approved to have his loans discharged in 2019. But he says in 2020 he repeatedly had his income monitoring paperwork rejected. "It wasn't until almost three months into this process that someone said, 'This is what we need you to say.' And it was something simple," Lehman recalls.Lehman is married with two children and took out loans to pay for multiple degrees, including a doctorate in computer science, but he was badly injured after being rear-ended in a car accident. After multiple surgeries to address trauma in his back, Lehman realized that, because of the pain, he could no longer work enough to pay back his student loan debts.While Lehman's income paperwork was finally accepted in 2020, he still worries about his old loans being unfairly reinstated."I feel like it's the sword of Damocles hanging over my head," Lehman says. Make one mistake "and everything comes back with a vengeance — because now you have all the loans plus the interest that's been building up over that time."The change the department announced Monday is meant to take some of that pressure off of borrowers who are currently navigating the income-monitoring period, like Lehman. For the duration of the pandemic, he will not have to submit further income-related paperwork.More importantly, the more than 41,000 borrowers who have had their loans reinstated since the start of the COVID-19 national emergency, on March 13, 2020 — because they failed to turn in the correct income paperwork — will have their debts erased all over again.Borrower advocates say they hope this move by the department is just a first step in a broader effort to make sure the nation's most vulnerable borrowers get the relief they're entitled to — by doing away with the income-monitoring period entirely and making debt relief automatic."Let's be clear: today's announcement is not a victory for students," Alex Elson, senior counsel and cofounder of Student Defense, said in a statement. His organization has encouraged the department to make the loan discharge process easier. Hundreds of thousands of borrowers with severe disabilities are eligible for relief, Elson said. "The Department of Education knows exactly who they are but is choosing to do nothing for them."On a Monday phone call with reporters, a senior Education Department official acknowledged that the Total and Permanent Disability program "is not working as efficiently as it should" and left open the possibility of further reform, saying "we are continuing to look at what else we can do here."According to the latest Education Department data, as of December 2020, 349,000 borrowers with severe, permanent disabilities were identified by the Social Security Administration as eligible to have their loans discharged. More than half — 196,000 — have federal loans in default.
